---
title: "Observer behavioral pattern"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - software design patterns
  - behavioral patterns
---

This pattern lets you define a subscription mechanism to notify multiple objects about any events that happen to the object they’re observing.


The object that has some interesting state is often called subject, but since it’s also going to notify other objects about the changes to its state, we’ll call it publisher. 

All other objects that want to track changes to the publisher’s state are called subscribers.

The Observer pattern suggests that you add a subscription mechanism to the publisher class so individual objects can subscribe to or unsubscribe from a stream of events coming from that publisher.

<h2>When should you use it ? </h2>

<ul>

<li>Use the Observer pattern when changes to the state of one object may require changing other objects, and the actual set of objects is unknown beforehand or changes dynamically.</li>

<li>Use the pattern when some objects in your app must observe others, but only for a limited time or in specific cases.</li>

</ul>

<h2> How do you implement it ? </h2>
<ol>
<li>Look over your business logic and try to break it down into two parts: the core functionality, independent from other code, will act as the publisher; the rest will turn into a set of subscriber classes.</li>

<li>Declare the subscriber interface. At a bare minimum, it should declare a single update method.</li>

<li>Declare the publisher interface and describe a pair of methods for adding a subscriber object to and removing it from the list. Remember that publishers must work with subscribers only via the subscriber interface.</li>

<li>Decide where to put the actual subscription list and the implementation of subscription methods. Usually, this code looks the same for all types of publishers, so the obvious place to put it is in an abstract class derived directly from the publisher interface. Concrete publishers extend that class, inheriting the subscription behavior.

However, if you’re applying the pattern to an existing class hierarchy, consider an approach based on composition: put the subscription logic into a separate object, and make all real publishers use it.</li>

<li>Create concrete publisher classes. Each time something important happens inside a publisher, it must notify all its subscribers.</li>

<li>Implement the update notification methods in concrete subscriber classes. Most subscribers would need some context data about the event. It can be passed as an argument of the notification method.

But there’s another option. Upon receiving a notification, the subscriber can fetch any data directly from the notification. In this case, the publisher must pass itself via the update method. The less flexible option is to link a publisher to the subscriber permanently via the constructor.</li>

<li>The client must create all necessary subscribers and register them with proper publishers.</li>


</ol>
