---
title: "Spyware"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Malware
  - Spyware
---

Spyware is malware that collects information from a computer and then transmits it to an external entity without the knowledge or consent of the computer's owner. 

The term spyware is also used more widely to refer to other products that are not strictly spyware. These products perform different functions, such as displaying unsolicited advertisements, collecting private information, redirecting page requests, and installing phone bookmarks.

A typical spyware program installs itself on the affected system so that it runs every time the computer is started (using CPU and RAM, reducing the stability of the computer), and it works all the time.

However, unlike viruses, it does not attempt to replicate on other computers, it works like a parasite.

The consequences of a moderate or severe spyware infection (aside from privacy concerns) generally include a considerable loss of system performance, and severe stability problems. They also cause problemas when connecting to the Internet. 

Some examples of known spyware are Gator or Bonzi Buddy.

<h1>Gator</h1>

One of the most-known spywares, made by Claria Corporation, is installed on users' computers usually as part of an application that incorporates it, for example Kazaa, or as an independent system. 

However, its power goes much further and in addition to spying on their activity, it modifies the web pages that are displayed on the computers where it is installed, changing the advertising banners for its own. 

Gator is detected by most anti-spyware softwares.

If advertising pop-ups appeared while browsing your computer may have been part of a network of several million systems that were estimated to be infected with Claria adware. 

In addition to having infiltrated your computer in a hidden way when installing any other application, and continually annoying you with the appearance of advertising windows, you should know that your browsing habits may had been collected by Claria in its database of more than 12 Terabytes and exposed to the highest bidder.

<h1>Bonzi Buddy</h1>


Bonzi Buddy, also known as Bonzi, is a spyware and malware program developed by Bonzi.com (currently out of function) and published by Time Warner Interactive and TecMagik. 

It is a program that aims to make it easier for people of all ages to use the Internet.

When BonziBuddy is started for the first time it will ask for 3 applications to be able to start along bonziBuddy. 
 
This is where the spyware is found when the application is opened, the purple ape called Bonzi or the green colored parrot named Peedy will ask the user to enter a "nickname" in order to "recognize" it; then, it will ask for data (Name and surname, Age, Address, Email, Credit card, Zip code etc ...) to register the user in Bonzi.com.

BonziBuddy was classified as spyware because it collected information from people as mentioned before. It also has a function where you have to put your credit card number and it will "protect your money" which is obviously false.

Several people complained about this program stating that it was annoying and that it was useless.

BonziBuddy used to appear in a pop-up or advertisement, on unreliable or little-known pages. 

Such as: 

<ul>
<li>pages that have neither "http" or "https" in their URL</li>
<li>pages +18</li>
<li>pirate movie pages</li>
</ul>

The pop-up featured the well-known purple monkey and phrases around it like "I can talk!" or "I can Search!". The pop-up also had a fake "X" to close the pop-up message, which sent you to the malicious page.