---
title: "Code Red"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Malware
  - Worms
---

Code Red was a computer worm first observed on the Internet on July 15, 2001. It attacked computers running Microsoft's IIS web server.

The Code Red worm was first discovered and researched by eEye Digital Security employees Marc Maiffret and Ryan Permeh, it exploited a vulnerability discovered by Riley Hassell. They named it "Code Red" because Code Red Mountain Dew was what they were drinking at the time.

Although the worm had been released on July 13, the largest group of infected computers was seen on July 19, 2001. On that day, the number of infected hosts reached 359,000.

The first version of the Code-Red worm caused very little damage. The worm did deface web pages on some machines with the phrase "Hacked by Chinese." Although it's attempts to spread itself consumed resources on infected machines and local area networks, it had little impact on global resources.

The Code-Red version 1 worm was memory resident, so an infected machine can be disinfected by simply rebooting it. However, once-rebooted, the machine is still vulnerable to infection. Any machines infected by Code-Red version 1 and subsequently rebooted were likely to be reinfected, because each newly infected machine probes the same list of IP addresses in the same order. 

<h1>Exploited vulnerability</h1>

The worm showed a vulnerability in software distributed with IIS, described in Microsoft Security Bulletin MS01-033, for which a patch had been available a month earlier.

The worm spread itself using a common type of vulnerability known as a buffer overflow. It did this by using a long string of the repeated letter 'N' to overflow a buffer, allowing the worm to execute arbitrary code and infect the remote machine. Kenneth D. Eichman was the first to discover how to block it, and was invited to the White House for his discovery. 

<h1>Code Red v2</h1>

At approximately 10:00 UTC in the morning of July 19th, 2001, a random seed variant of the Code-Red worm (CRv2) began to infect hosts running unpatched versions of Microsoft's IIS webserver. The worm again spreads by probing random IP addresses and infecting all hosts vulnerable to the IIS exploit. Code-Red version 2 lacks the static seed found in the random number generator of Code-Red version 1. In contrast, Code-Red version 2 uses a random seed, so each infected computer tries to infect a different list of randomly generated IP addresses. This seemingly minor change had a major impact: more than 359,000 machines were infected with Code-Red version 2 in just fourteen hours.

Because Code-Red version 2 is identical to Code-Red version 1 in all respects except the seed for its random number generator, its only actual damage is the "Hacked by Chinese" message added to top level webpages on some hosts. 

However, Code-Red version 2 had a greater impact on global infrastructure due to the sheer volume of hosts infected and probes sent to infect new hosts. Code-Red version 2 also wreaked havoc on some additional devices with web interfaces, such as routers, switches, DSL modems, and printers. Although these devices were not infected with the worm, they either crashed or rebooted when an infected machine attempted to send them a copy of the worm.

Like Code-Red version 1, Code-Red version 2 can be removed from a computer simply by rebooting it. However, rebooting the machine does not prevent reinfection once the machine is online again. On July 19th, the probe rate to hosts was so high that many machines were infected as the patch for the .ida vulnerability was applied. 

<h1>Code Red v3 "CodeRedII"</h1>

On August 4, 2001, an entirely new worm, CodeRedII began to exploit the buffer-overflow vulnerability in Microsoft's IIS webservers. Although the new worm is completely unrelated to the original Code-Red worm, the source code of the worm contained the string "CodeRedII" which became the name of the new worm.

Ryan Permeh and Marc Maiffret analyzed CodeRedII to determine its attack mechanism. When a worm infects a new host, it first determines if the system has already been infected. If not, the worm initiates its propagation mechanism, sets up a "backdoor" into the infected machine, becomes dormant for a day, and then reboots the machine. Unlike Code-Red, CodeRedII is not memory resident, so rebooting an infected machine does not eliminate CodeRedII.

After rebooting the machine, the CodeRedII worm begins to spread. If the host infected with CodeRedII has Chinese (Taiwanese) or Chinese (PRC) as the system language, it uses 600 threads to probe other machines. All other machines use 300 threads. CodeRedII uses a more complex method of selecting hosts to probe than Code-Red. 

CodeRedII generates a random IP address and then applies a mask to produce the IP address to probe. The length of the mask determines the similarity between the IP address of the infected machine and the probed machine. 

1/8th of the time, CodeRedII probes a completely random IP address. 

1/2 of the time, CodeRedII probes a machine in the same /8 (so if the infected machine had the IP address 10.9.8.7, the IP address probed would start with 10.), while 3/8ths of the time, it probes a machine on the same /16 (so the IP address probed would start with 10.9.). Like Code-Red, CodeRedII avoids probing IP addresses in 224.0.0.0/8 (multicast) and 127.0.0.0/8 (loopback). 

The bias towards the local /16 and /8 networks means that an infected machine may be more likely to probe a susceptible machine, based on the supposition that machines on a single network are more likely to be running the same software as machines on unrelated IP addresses.

The CodeRedII worm is much more dangerous than Code-Red because CodeRedII installs a mechanism for remote, root-level access to the infected machine.

Unlike Code-Red, CodeRedII neither defaces web pages on infected machines nor launches a Denial-of-Service attack. However, the backdoor installed on the machine allows any code to be executed, so the machines could be used as zombies for future attacks (DoS or otherwise).
