---
title: "Bridge structural pattern"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Software Design Patterns
  - Structural Patterns
---

Bridge is a structural design pattern that lets you split a large class or a set of closely related classes into two separate hierarchies —abstraction and implementation— which can be developed independently of each other.

The class itself can be thought of as the abstraction and what the class can do as the implementation. The bridge pattern can also be thought of as two layers of abstraction.

<h2>When should you use it ? </h2>

<ul>
<li>Use the Bridge pattern when you want to divide and organize a monolithic class that has several variants of some functionality.</li>

<li>Use the pattern when you need to extend a class in several orthogonal (independent) dimensions.</li>

<li>Use the Bridge if you need to be able to switch implementations at runtime.</li>
</ul>

<h2> How do you implement it ? </h2>

<ol>

<li>Identify the orthogonal dimensions in your classes. These independent concepts could be: abstraction/platform, domain/infrastructure, front-end/back-end, or interface/implementation.</li>

<li>See what operations the client needs and define them in the base abstraction class.</li>

<li>Determine the operations available on all platforms. Declare the ones that the abstraction needs in the general implementation interface.</li>

<li>For all platforms in your domain create concrete implementation classes, but make sure they all follow the implementation interface.</li>

<li>Inside the abstraction class, add a reference field for the implementation type. The abstraction delegates most of the work to the implementation object that’s referenced in that field.</li>

<li>If you have several variants of high-level logic, create refined abstractions for each variant by extending the base abstraction class.</li>

<li>The client code should pass an implementation object to the abstraction’s constructor to associate one with the other. After that, the client can forget about the implementation and work only with the abstraction object.</li>
</ol>


