---
title: "Gitlab"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Dev-ops
  - software testing
---

Gitlab is a Git-based collaborative software development and version control web service. In addition to a repository manager, the service also offers wiki hosting and a bug tracking system, all of which are published under an open source license. 

GitLab is a complete suite that allows you to manage, administer, create and connect repositories with different applications and do all kinds of integrations with them, offering an environment and a platform in which you can perform the various stages of your development life cycle operations. 

<h2>Use Cases</h2>
Gitlab integrates a great number of essential tools for software development/deployment, and project management.

Some of the things developers can do with gitlab:

<ul>

<li>Host code in repositories with version control.</li>
<li>Track proposals for new implementations, bug reports, and feedback with a fully featured Issue Tracker.</li>
<li>Organize and prioritize with Issue Boards.</li>
<li>Review code in Merge Requests with live-preview changes per branch with Review Apps.</li>
<li>Build, testing, and deploying with built-in Continuous Integration.</li>
<li>Deploy personal and professional static websites with GitLab Pages.</li>
<li>Integrate with Docker by using GitLab Container Registry.</li>
<li>Track the development lifecycle by using GitLab Value Stream Analytics.</li>
<li>Provide support with Service Desk.</li>
<li> Export issues as CSV. </li>
	
</ul>

<h2> Create</h2>

Create, view, and manage code and project data through powerful branching tools.

GitLab helps teams design, develop and securely manage code and project data from a single distributed version control system to enable rapid iteration and delivery of business value. 

GitLab repositories provide a scalable, single source of truth for collaborating on projects and code which enables teams to be productive without disrupting their workflows. 

<h2> Verify </h2>

Keep strict quality standards for production code with automatic testing and reporting.

GitLab helps delivery teams fully embrace continuous integration to automate the builds, integration and verification of their code.

It's leading CI capabilities enables automated testing, Static Analysis Security Testing, Dynamic Analysis Security testing and code quality analysis to provide fast feedback to developers and testers about the quality of their code. 
 
With pipelines that enable concurrent testing and parallel execution, teams quickly get insight about every commit, allowing them to deliver higher quality code faster. 


<h2> Release</h2>

GitLab's integrated CD solution allows you to ship code with zero-touch, be it on one or one thousand servers.

It helps automate the release and delivery of applications, shortening the delivery lifecycle, streamlining manual processes, and accelerating team velocity.

With Continuous Delivery (CD) built right into the pipeline, deployments can be automated to multiple environments like staging and production, and the system just knows what to do without being told - even for more advanced patterns like canary deployments. 

With feature flags, built-in auditing/traceability, on-demand environments, and GitLab pages for static content delivery, you'll be able to deliver faster and with more confidence. 