---
title: "Virtual Private Network"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Networking theory
  - 
---
A virtual private network (VPN) is a computer network technology that allows a secure extension of the local area network (LAN) over a public or uncontrolled network such as the Internet. 

It allows the device on the network to send and receive data on shared or public networks as if it were a private network, with all the functionality, security and management policies of a private network.

<b> This is done by establishing a virtual point-to-point connection by using dedicated connections, encryption, or a combination of both methods.</b>

Common examples are the possibility of connecting two or more branch offices of a company using the Internet as a link, allowing members of the technical support team to connect from their home to the computer center or allowing a user to access their home computer from a remote site, such as a hotel.

The VPN connection over the Internet is technically a wide area network (WAN) junction between the sites, but it appears to the user as if it were a private link: hence the designation virtual private network. 

<h2>Types</h2>

<h3>Remote access connection</h3>

A remote access connection is made by a client or a user of a computer that connects to a private network, the packets sent through the VPN connection are originated by the remote access client, and this is authenticated to the remote access server , and the server authenticates to the client.

<h3>VPN router to router connection</h3>

A router-to-router VPN connection is made by a router, and this in turn connects to a private network. In this type of connection, the packets sent from any router do not originate from the routers. The router that makes the call is authenticated by the router that responds and this in turn is authenticated by the router that makes the call and also serves the intranet.

<h3>VPN firewall to firewall connection</h3>

A VPN firewall connection is made by one of them, and this in turn connects to a private network. In this type of connection, packages are sent from any user on the Internet. The firewall that makes the call authenticates itself to the respondent and the latter in turn authenticates itself to the caller.

<h3>VPN in mobile environments</h3>

The mobile VPN is established when the termination point of the VPN is not fixed to a single IP address, but moves between several networks such as the data networks of mobile operators or different access points of a Wi-Fi network. 

Mobile VPNs have been used in public safety by giving law enforcement access to critical applications such as databases with criminal identification data, while the connection moves between different subnets of a mobile network.

They are also used in the management of technician teams and in healthcare organizations among other industries. 
 
More and more, mobile VPNs are being adapted by professionals who need reliable connections. They are used to move between networks without losing the application session or losing the secure session on the VPN. 