---
title: "Flutter"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - flutter
---

Flutter is a free and open-source mobile UI framework created by Google and released in May 2017.

In a few words, it allows you to create a native mobile application with only one codebase. This means that you can use one programming language and one codebase to create two different apps (for iOS and Android).

Flutter consists of two important parts:
<ul>
<li>A Software Development Kit: A collection of tools that are going to help you develop your applications. This includes tools to compile your code into native machine code (code for iOS and Android).</li>
<li>A Framework (UI Library based on widgets): A collection of reusable UI elements (buttons, text inputs, sliders, and so on) that you can personalize for your own needs.</li>
</ul>

To develop with Flutter, you will use a programming language called Dart. The language was created by Google in October 2011, but it has improved a lot over these past years.

Dart focuses on front-end development, and you can use it to create mobile and web applications.

Dart is a typed object programming language. You can compare Dart's syntax to JavaScript.

<h2>Why you should learn Flutter?</h2>

<h3>Simple to learn and use</h3>

Flutter is a modern framework, and you can feel it! It’s way simpler to create mobile applications with it. If you have used Java, Swift, or React Native, you'll notice how Flutter is different.

<h3>Quick compilation: maximum productivity</h3>

Thanks to Flutter, you can change your code and see the results in real-time. It’s called Hot-Reload. It only takes a short amount of time after you save to update the application itself.

Significant modifications force you to reload the app. But if you do work like design, for example, and change the size of an element, it’s in real-time!

<h3>Ideal for startup MVPs</h3>

If you want to show your product to investors as soon as possible, Flutter is a good choice.

Here are the top 4 reasons to use it for your MVP:
<ul>
<li>It’s cheaper to develop a mobile application with Flutter because you don’t need to create and maintain two mobile apps (one for iOS and one for Android).</li>
<li>One developer is all you need to create your MVP.</li>
<li>It’s performant – you won't notice the difference between a native application and a Flutter app.</li>
<li>It’s beautiful – you can easily use widgets provided by Flutter and personalize it to create a valuable UI for your customers.</li>
</ul>

<h3>Good documentation</h3>

You can learn a lot from Flutter's documentation, and everything is very detailed with easy examples for basic use cases.

You can find it here https://flutter.dev/docs

On the flutter docs you will be able to read sections like the flutter cookbook.  A collection of recipes that will streamline your development process with easy and ready to use code examples.

This recipes consist of both code and steps by steps descriptions on how to implement it.

